---
id: "mara"
headword: "Māra"
base_headword: "Māra"
disambiguator: ""
letter: "M"
section: "Mahi-Mo."
status: "untranslated"
redirect_to: 
source:
  epub_file: "Ops/059.html"
  source_order: 9350
  source_anchor: 
aliases:
  - "Mara"
link_candidates:
  - "Adhipati"
  - "Ajapāla"
  - "Antaka"
  - "Aratī"
  - "Asuras"
  - "Awakening"
  - "Aṅguttaranikāya"
  - "Beluvagāma"
  - "Brahmanimantanikasutta"
  - "Buddha"
  - "Buddhaghosa"
  - "Buddhavaṁsa Commentary"
  - "Cakkāvudha"
  - "Channa"
  - "Cālā"
  - "Devas"
  - "Dhaniya"
  - "Dhītaro Sutta"
  - "Dūsī"
  - "Ekasalā"
  - "Gijjhakūṭa"
  - "Girimekhala"
  - "Godhika"
  - "Gotama"
  - "Indagutta"
  - "Jinālaṅkāra"
  - "Jātaka Commentary"
  - "Kaṇha"
  - "Khemā"
  - "Kisā Gotamī"
  - "Kāmāvacara"
  - "Kāḷā"
  - "Kāḷī"
  - "Maddakucchi"
  - "Mahā Parinibbānasutta"
  - "Mahā Saccakasutta"
  - "Mahā Samayasutta"
  - "Mahā Thūpa"
  - "Moggallāna"
  - "Māra"
  - "Mārasaṁyutta"
  - "Māratajjanīyasutta"
  - "Namuci"
  - "Nandiya"
  - "Nerañjarā"
  - "Netti"
  - "Nidānakathā"
  - "Nigrodha"
  - "Nāgas"
  - "Padhānasutta"
  - "Pajāpatī"
  - "Pamattabandhu"
  - "Paribbājakas"
  - "Pañcasikha"
  - "Pañcasālā"
  - "Ragā"
  - "Rāhula"
  - "Sakka"
  - "Samiddhi"
  - "Saṁyutta"
  - "Saṁyuttanikāya"
  - "Selā"
  - "Sisūpacālā"
  - "Somā"
  - "Sākyan"
  - "Sīlavatī"
  - "Sūrambattha"
  - "Taṇhā"
  - "Upacālā"
  - "Uppalavaṇṇā"
  - "Uruvelā"
  - "Uttarādhyayanasūtra"
  - "Vajirā"
  - "Vakkali"
  - "Vasavatti"
  - "Vasavattī"
  - "Verañja"
  - "Vetambarī"
  - "Vijayā"
  - "Yakkha"
  - "Ābhassara"
  - "Āḷavikā"
---

# Māra

## English source

Māra. Generally regarded as the personification of Death, the Evil One, the Tempter (the Buddhist counterpart of the Devil or Principle of Destruction). The legends concerning Māra are, in the books, very involved and defy any attempts at unravelling them. In the latest accounts, mention is made of five *Māras: Khandha Māra, Kilesa Māra, Abhisaṅkhāra Māra, Maccu Māra* and *Devaputta Māra* as shown in the following quotations: *pañcannaṁ pi Mārānaṁ vijayato Jino*, the Victor, conqueror of the five Māras (Thag­a.ii.16); *sabbāmittehi khandhakilesābhisaṅkhāramaccudevaputtasaṅkhāte, sabbapaccatthike*, along with all enemies – namely, the constituents, defilements, volitional formations, death, and the Devaputta – (the Buddha has conquered) all adversaries (Thag­a.ii.46); *saṅkhepato vā pañcakilesakhandhābhisaṅkhāradevaputtamaccumāre abhañji, tasmā... bhagavā ti vuccati*, in brief, he shattered the five Māras – namely, the defilements, aggregates, volitional formations, the Devaputta, and death. Therefore ... he is called the Bhagavā (Vsm.211).

Elsewhere, however, Māra is spoken of as one, three, or four. Where Māra is one, the reference is generally either to the *kilesas* or to Death. Thus: *Mārenā ti kilesamārena*, by Māra means by the Māra of the defilements (Iti-a.197); *Mārassa visaye ti kilesamārassa visaye*, in Māra’s domain means in the domain of the Māra of defilements (Thag­a.ii.70); *jetvāna maccuno senaṁ vimokkhena anāvaran-ti lokattayābhibyāpanato diyaḍḍhasahassādi vibhāgato ca vipulattā aññehi avārituṁ paṭisedhetuṁ asakkuṇeyyattā ca maccuno, Mārassa senaṁ vimokkhena ariyamaggena jetvā*, having conquered the army of Death, through the unobstructed liberation by means of the Noble Path, supreme over the three worlds, and the 1,500 (world systems), vast, incapable of being obstructed or repelled by others, he conquered Māra’s army through the liberating Noble Path (Iti-a.198); *Mārāsenā ti ettha satte anatthe niyojento māretī ti Māro*, here, Māra is so called because he leads beings to harm and destroys them (Ud­a.325); *nihato Māro bodhimūle ti vihato samucchinno kilesamāro bodhirukkhamūle*, Māra was defeated at the foot of the Bodhi tree means the Māra of defilements was utterly destroyed and uprooted at the base of the Tree of Awakening (<span class="dppn-term dppn-term-t14" data-dppn-term-pos="1" data-dppn-term-class="t14">Netti</span> Commentary 235); *vasaṁ Mārassa gacchatī ti kilesamārassa ca sattamārassa* (?) *ca vasaṁ gacchi*, he falls under Māra’s control means he comes under the power of both the Māra of defilements and Māra as attachment (<span class="dppn-term dppn-term-t14" data-dppn-term-pos="2" data-dppn-term-class="t14">Netti</span>, p. 86); *tato sukhumataraṁ Mārabandhanan-ti kilesabandhanaṁ panetam tato sukhumataraṁ*, more subtle than that is the bondage of Māra - indeed, this bondage of defilements is even more subtle than that (SN­a.iii.82); *Māro māro ti maraṇaṁ pucchati, māradhammo ti maraṇadhammo*, Māra, Māra, he asks about death; the nature of Māra means the nature of death (SN­a.ii.246).

It is evidently with this same significance that the term Māra, in the older books, is applied to the whole of worldly existence, the five *khandhas*, or the realm of rebirth, as opposed to *Nibbāna*. Thus Māra is defined at CNid. (No. 506) as *kammābhisaṅkhāravasena paṭisandhiko khandhamāro, dhātumāro, āyatanamāro*, through the force of volitional formations, the connecting consciousness becomes the Māra of the constituents, the Māra of the elements, the Māra of the sense spheres. And again: *Māro Māro ti bhante vuccati katamo nu kho bhante Māro ti? Rūpaṁ kho, Rādha, Māro, vedanāmāro, saññāmāro, saṅkhāramāro viññāṇam-Māro*, venerable sir, people say Māra, Māra. What, venerable sir, is this Māra? Form is Māra, Rādha. Feeling is Māra. Perception is Māra. Volitional formations are Māra. Consciousness is Māra (SN.iii.195); *yo kho Rādha Māro tatra chando pahātabbo. Ko ca Rādha Māro? Rūpaṁ kho Rādha Māro … pe … vedanāmāro. Tatra kho Rādha chando pahātabbo*, Rādha, whatever is called Māra - desire for that should be abandoned. And Rādha, what is Māra? Form is Māra... feeling is Māra... perception is Māra... volitional formations are Māra... consciousness is Māra. Rādha, desire for these should be abandoned (SN.iii.198); *sa upādiyamāno kho bhikkhu baddho Mārassa, anupadiyamāno mutto pāpimāto*, a monk who clings is bound by Māra; who does not cling is freed from the Wicked One (SN.iii.74); *evaṁ sukhumaṁ kho bhikkhave, Vepacittibandhanaṁ; tato sukhumataraṁ mārabandhanaṁ; maññamāno kho bhikkhave baddho Mārassa, amaññamāno mutto pāpimato*, truly subtle, monks, is the bondage of Vepacitti; yet more subtle than that is the bondage of Māra. One who conceives is bound by Māra; who does not conceive is freed from the Evil One (SN.iv.202); *labhati Māro otāraṁ, labhati Māro ārammaṇaṁ*, Māra gains an opening; Māra gains a foothold (SN.iv.85); *santi bhikkhave cakkhuviññeyyarūpā … pe … tañ ce bhikkhu abhinandati … pe … ayaṁ vuccati bhikkhave bhikkhu āvāsagato Mārassa, Mārassa vasaṁ, gato*, there are, monks, forms cognizable by the eye ... if a monk delights in them ... this is called a monk who has entered Māra’s abode, who has come under Māra’s control (SN.iv.91); *dhunātha maccuno senaṁ nalāgāraṁ va kuñjaro ti paññindriyassa padathānaṁ*, shake off Māra’s army, as an elephant shakes off a hut of reeds (<span class="dppn-term dppn-term-t14" data-dppn-term-pos="3" data-dppn-term-class="t14">Netti</span>, p. 40); *rūpe kho Rādha sati Māro vā assa māretā vā yo vā pana mīyati. Tasmā he tvaṁ Rādha rūpaṁ māro ti passa māretā ti passa mīyatī ti passa … ye nam evaṁ passanti te sammā passanti*, when there is form, Rādha, then there is Māra, or the killer, or the one who dies. Therefore, Rādha, see form as Māra, see it as the killer, see it as the one who dies ... Those who see thus see rightly (SN.iii.189); *Mārasaṁyogan-ti tebhūmakavattaṁ*, the bondage of Māra means being caught up in the three realms (of existence) (Snp­a.ii.506).

The Commentaries also speak of three *Māras: bodhipallaṅke tinnaṁ Mārānaṁ matthakaṁ bhinditvā*, having shattered the heads of the three Māras upon the seat of enlightenment (DN­a.ii.659); *aparājitasaṅghan-ti ajjeva tayo Māre madditvā vijitasaṅgānaṁ matthakaṁ madditvā anuttaraṁ Sammāsambodhiṁ abhisambuddho*, the invincible victor – having this very day crushed the three Māras, having shattered the heads of the conquered hosts – Awakened to the unsurpassed perfect Awakening (CNid­a. p. 47). In some cases the three *Māras* are specified: *yathayidaṁ bhikkhave mārabalan-ti yathā idaṁ Devaputtamāra maccumāra kilesamārānaṁ balaṁ appasahaṁ durābhisambhavaṁ*, monks, this is called Māra’s power – that is, the power of Devaputta Māra, Māra as death, and Māra as defilements. This power is hard to overcome, difficult to surpass (DN­a.iii.858); *maccuhāyino ti maraṇamaccu kilesamaccu Devaputtamaccu hāyino, tividham-pi taṁ maccuṁ hitvā gāmino ti vuttaṁ hoti*, those called conquerors of death are ones who have abandoned the threefold death – namely, the death of physical cessation, the death of the defilements, and the death brought by the Devaputta (Māra). It is said they proceed having completely transcended all these forms of death (Snp­a.ii.508; cp. MN­a.ii.619); *na lacchati Māro otāraṁ, Māro ti devaputtamāro pi maccumāro pi kilesamāro pi*, Māra gains no foothold. By Māra is meant the celestial tempter, the force of death, and the corruptions of mind (DN­a.iii.846); but elsewhere five are mentioned e.g., *ariyamaggakkhaṇe kilesamāro abhisaṅkhāramāro, Devaputtamāro ca carimaka cittakkhaṇe khandhamāro maccumāro ti pañcavidhamāro abhibhūto parājito*, at the moment of attaining the Noble Path, the fivefold Māra are completely vanquished and defeated: the defilements that distort the mind, the volitional formations that drive rebirth, and Devaputta Māra’s illusions – while in the final moment of consciousness, the constituents that bind one to existence and the very force of mortality itself are conquered (Ud­a.216). Very occasionally four *Māras* are mentioned: *catunnaṁ Mārānaṁ matthakaṁ madditvā anuttaraṁ sammāsambodhiṁ abhisamabuddho*, having crushed the heads of the four Māras, he awakened to the supreme perfect Awakening (MNid. 129); *indakhīlopamo catubbidhamāraparavādigaṇehi akampiyatthena*, like an unshaking gatepost, he is impervious to the assaults of the fourfold Māra, through his utterly unshakable nature (Snp­a.i.201); *Mārasenaṁ sasenaṁ abhibhuyyā ti kilesasenāya anantasenāya ca sasenaṁ anavasittham, catubbidham-pi māraṁ abhibhavitvā Devaputtamārassā pi hi guṇamāraṇe sahāyabhāvūpagamanato kilesā senā ti vuccanti*, having overpowered Māra’s army along with its allies means he overpowered the fourfold Māra and the endless armies of defilements, along with their allies, were left without refuge. Even the Devaputta Māra’s forces are called an army of defilements because they assist in perpetuating bondage to negative qualities (Iti-a.136). The last quotation seems to indicate that the four *Māras* are the five *Māras* less *Devaputta* Māra.

A few particulars are available about *Devaputta* Māra*: Māro ti Vasavattibhūmiyaṁ aññataro dāmarikadevaputto. So hi taṁ ṭhānaṁ atikkamitukāmaṁ janaṁ yaṁ na sakkoti taṁ māreti, yaṁ na sakkoti tassa pi maraṇaṁ icchati, tenā Māro ti vuccati*, Māra refers to a certain troublemaking Devaputta in the Vasavatti realm. He is called Māra because he kills those who wish to transcend his domain but lack the power to do so; even when he cannot kill someone, he still desires their death – thus he is named Māra (Snp­a.i.44); *Māro yeva pana sattasaṅkhātāya pajāya adhipaṭibhāvena idha Pajāpatī ti adhippeto. So hi kuhiṁ vasatī ti? Paranimmittavasavattidevaloke. Tatra hi Vasavattirājā rajjaṁ kāreti. Māro ekasmiṁ padese attano parisāya issariyaṁ pavattento rajjapaccante dāmarikarājaputto viya vasatī ti vadanti*, here, the term Māra specifically refers to his dominance over beings perceived as creations. Where does he dwell? In the Paranimmittavasavatti Deva realm. There, King Vasavatti rules, while Māra – exercising authority over his own retinue in one region – resides like a rebellious prince ruling a border territory (MN­a.i.28); *so hi Māro opapātiko kāmāvacarissaro, kadāci brahmapārisajjānam-pi kāye adhimuccituṁ samattho,* this Māra is a spontaneously reborn being, sovereign over the realm of sensual desire. On occasion, he can even manifest within the assemblies of Brahmā’s retinue (<span class="dppn-term dppn-term-t14" data-dppn-term-pos="4" data-dppn-term-class="t14">Jinālaṅkāra</span> *Ṭīkā*, p.217).

In view of the many studies of Māra by various scholars, already existing, it might be worthwhile here, too, to attempt a theory of Māra in Buddhism, based chiefly on the above data. The commonest use of the word was evidently in the sense of Death. From this it was extended to mean “the world under the sway of death” (also called *Māradheyya* – e.g., AN.iv.228) and the beings therein. Thence, the *kilesas* also came to be called Māra in that they were instruments of Death, the causes enabling Death to hold sway over the world. All Temptations brought about by the *kilesas* were likewise regarded as the work of Death. There was also evidently a legend of a *Devaputta* of the <span class="dppn-term dppn-term-t14" data-dppn-term-pos="5" data-dppn-term-class="t14">Vasavatti</span> world, called Māra, who considered himself the head of the <span class="dppn-term dppn-term-t14" data-dppn-term-pos="6" data-dppn-term-class="t14">Kāmāvacara</span> world and who recognized any attempt to curb the enjoyment of sensual pleasures, as a direct challenge to himself and to his authority. As time went on these different conceptions of the word became confused one with the other, but this confusion is not always difficult to unravel.

Various statements are found in the *Piṭakas* connected with Māra, which have, obviously, reference to Death, the *kilesas*, and the world over which Death and the *kilesas* hold sway. Thus: Those who can restrain the mind and check its propensities can escape the snares of Māra (Dhp. 7). He who delights in objects cognizant to the eye, etc., has gone under Māra’s sway (SN.iv.91). He who has attachment is entangled by Māra (SN.iii.73). Māra will overthrow him who is unrestrained in his senses, immoderate in his food, idle and weak (Dhp. 8). By attaining the Noble Eightfold Path one can be free from Māra (Dhp. 40). The <span class="dppn-term dppn-term-t14" data-dppn-term-pos="7" data-dppn-term-class="t14">Saṁyutta</span> (i.135) records a conversation between Māra and <span class="dppn-term dppn-term-t14" data-dppn-term-pos="8" data-dppn-term-class="t14">Vajirā</span>. She has attained *Arahant*-ship, and tells Māra: “There is no *satta* here who can come under your control; there is no being but a mere heap of *saṅkhāras* (*suddhasaṅkhārapuñja*).

The later books, especially the <span class="dppn-term dppn-term-t14" data-dppn-term-pos="9" data-dppn-term-class="t14">Nidānakathā</span> of the <span class="dppn-term dppn-term-t14" data-dppn-term-pos="10" data-dppn-term-class="t14">Jātaka Commentary</span> (Ja.i.71ff.; cp. MN­a.i.384) and the <span class="dppn-term dppn-term-t14" data-dppn-term-pos="11" data-dppn-term-class="t14">Buddhavaṁsa Commentary</span> (p. 239f), contain a very lively and detailed description of the temptation of the Buddha by Māra, as the Buddha sat under the Bodhi-tree immediately before his <span class="dppn-term dppn-term-t20" data-dppn-term-pos="12" data-dppn-term-class="t20">Awakening</span>. These accounts describe how Māra, the *Devaputta*, seeing the Bodhisatta seated, with the firm resolve, of becoming a Buddha, summoned all his forces and advanced against him. These forces extended to a distance of twelve *yojanas* to the front of the Bodhisatta, twelve to the back, and nine each to the right and to the left. Māra himself, thousand-armed, rode on his elephant, <span class="dppn-term dppn-term-t14" data-dppn-term-pos="13" data-dppn-term-class="t14">Girimekhala</span>, one hundred and fifty leagues in height. His followers assumed various fearsome shapes and were armed with dreadful weapons. At Māra’s approach, all the various <span class="dppn-term dppn-term-t14" data-dppn-term-pos="14" data-dppn-term-class="t14">Devas</span>, <span class="dppn-term dppn-term-t14" data-dppn-term-pos="15" data-dppn-term-class="t14">Nāgas</span> and others, who were gathered round the Bodhisatta singing his praises and paying him homage, disappeared in headlong flight. The Bodhisatta was left alone, and he called to his assistance the ten *pāramī* which he had practiced to perfection.

Māra’s army is described as being tenfold, and each division of the army is described, in very late accounts (especially in Sinhalese books), with great wealth of detail. Each division was faced by the Buddha with one *pāramī* and was put to flight. Māra’s last weapon was the <span class="dppn-term dppn-term-t14" data-dppn-term-pos="16" data-dppn-term-class="t14">Cakkāvudha</span> (*q.v.*). But when he hurled it at the Buddha it stood over him like a canopy of flowers. Still undaunted, Māra challenged the Buddha to show that the seat on which he sat was his by right. Māra’s followers all shouted their evidence that the seat was Māra’s. The Buddha, having no other witness, asked the Earth to bear testimony on his behalf, and the Earth roared in response. Māra and his followers fled in utter rout, and the <span class="dppn-term dppn-term-t14" data-dppn-term-pos="17" data-dppn-term-class="t14">Devas</span> and others gathered round the Buddha to celebrate his victory. The sun set on the defeat of Māra. This, in brief, is the account of the Buddha’s conquest of Māra, greatly elaborated in later chronicles, and illustrated in countless Buddhist shrines and temples with all the wealth of riotous color and fanciful imagery that gifted artists could command.

That this account of the Buddha’s struggle with Māra is literally true, none but the most ignorant of the Buddhists believe, even at the present day. The Buddhist point of view has been well expressed by Rhys Davids (Article on Buddha in the Encyclopaedia Britannica). We are to understand by the attack of Māra’s forces, that all the Buddha’s “old temptations came back upon him with renewed force. For years he had looked at all earthly good through the medium of a philosophy which had taught him that it, without exception, carried within itself the seeds of bitterness and was altogether worthless and impermanent; but now, to his wavering faith, the sweet delights of home and love, the charms of wealth and power, began to show themselves in a different light and glow again with attractive colors. He doubted and agonized in his doubt, but as the sun set, the religious side of his nature had won the victory and seems to have come out even purified from the struggle.” There is no need to ask, as does Thomas, with apparently great suspicion (Thomas: *Life and Legend of the Buddha*, 230), whether we can assume that the elaborators of the Māra story were recording “a subjective experience under the form of an objective reality,” and did they know or think that this was the real psychological experience which the Buddha went through? The living traditions of the Buddhist countries supply the adequate answer, without the aid of the rationalists. The epic nature of the subject gave ample scope for the elaboration so dear to the hearts of the Pāli rhapsodists.

The similar story among Jains, as recorded in their commentarial works – e.g., in the <span class="dppn-term dppn-term-t14" data-dppn-term-pos="18" data-dppn-term-class="t14">Uttarādhyayanasūtra</span> (ZDMG. vol. 49 (1915), 321ff) bears no close parallelism to the Buddhist account, but only a faint resemblance.

There is no doubt that the Māra legend had its origin in the <span class="dppn-term dppn-term-t14" data-dppn-term-pos="19" data-dppn-term-class="t14">Padhānasutta</span> (*q.v.*). There Māra is represented as visiting <span class="dppn-term dppn-term-t14" data-dppn-term-pos="20" data-dppn-term-class="t14">Gotama</span> on the banks of the <span class="dppn-term dppn-term-t14" data-dppn-term-pos="21" data-dppn-term-class="t14">Nerañjarā</span>, where he is practicing austerities and tempting him to abandon his striving and devote himself to good works. <span class="dppn-term dppn-term-t14" data-dppn-term-pos="22" data-dppn-term-class="t14">Gotama</span> refers to Māra’s army as being tenfold. The divisions are as follows: the first consists of the Lusts; the second is Aversion; the third Hunger and Thirst; the fourth Craving; the fifth Sloth and Indolence; the sixth Cowardice; the seventh Doubt; the eighth Hypocrisy and Stupidity; Gains, Fame, Honour and Glory falsely obtained form the ninth; and the tenth is the Lauding of oneself and the Contemning of others. “Seeing this army on all sides,” says the Buddha, “I go forth to meet Māra with his equipage (*savāhanaṁ*). He shall not make me yield ground. That army of thine, which the world of <span class="dppn-term dppn-term-t14" data-dppn-term-pos="23" data-dppn-term-class="t14">Devas</span> and men conquers not, even that, with my wisdom, will I smite, as an unbaked earthen bowl with a stone.” Here we have practically all the elements found in the later elaborated versions.

The second part of the <span class="dppn-term dppn-term-t14" data-dppn-term-pos="24" data-dppn-term-class="t14">Padhānasutta</span> (Snp. vs. 446f.; cf. SN.i.122) is obviously concerned with later events in the life of <span class="dppn-term dppn-term-t14" data-dppn-term-pos="25" data-dppn-term-class="t14">Gotama</span>, and this the Commentary (Snp­a.ii.391) definitely tells us. After Māra had retired discomfited, he followed the Buddha for seven years, watching for any transgression on his part. But the quest was in vain, and, “like a crow attacking a rock,” he left <span class="dppn-term dppn-term-t14" data-dppn-term-pos="26" data-dppn-term-class="t14">Gotama</span> in disgust. “The lute of Māra, who was so overcome with grief, slipped from his arm. Then, in dejection, the <span class="dppn-term dppn-term-t14" data-dppn-term-pos="27" data-dppn-term-class="t14">Yakkha</span> disappeared thence.” This lute, according to the Commentary (Snp­a.ii.394), was picked up by <span class="dppn-term dppn-term-t14" data-dppn-term-pos="28" data-dppn-term-class="t14">Sakka</span> and given to <span class="dppn-term dppn-term-t14" data-dppn-term-pos="29" data-dppn-term-class="t14">Pañcasikha</span>. Of this part of the *Sutta*, more anon.

The <span class="dppn-term dppn-term-t14" data-dppn-term-pos="30" data-dppn-term-class="t14">Saṁyuttanikāya</span> (SN.i.124f.; given also at *Lalitavistara* 490 (378); cp. AN.v.46; see also Dhp­a.iii.195f) also contains a *Sutta* (<span class="dppn-term dppn-term-t14" data-dppn-term-pos="31" data-dppn-term-class="t14">Dhītaro Sutta</span>) in which three daughters of Māra are represented as tempting the Buddha after his <span class="dppn-term dppn-term-t20" data-dppn-term-pos="32" data-dppn-term-class="t20">Awakening</span>. Their names are <span class="dppn-term dppn-term-t14" data-dppn-term-pos="33" data-dppn-term-class="t14">Taṇhā</span>, <span class="dppn-term dppn-term-t14" data-dppn-term-pos="34" data-dppn-term-class="t14">Aratī</span> and <span class="dppn-term dppn-term-t14" data-dppn-term-pos="35" data-dppn-term-class="t14">Ragā</span>, and they are evidently personifications of three of the ten forces in Māra’s army, as given in the <span class="dppn-term dppn-term-t14" data-dppn-term-pos="36" data-dppn-term-class="t14">Padhānasutta</span>. They assume numerous forms of varying age and charm, full of blandishment, but their attempt is vain, and they are obliged to admit defeat.

Once Māra came to be regarded as the Spirit of Evil all temptations of lust, fear, greed, etc., were regarded as his activities, and Māra was represented as assuming various disguises in order to carry out his nefarious plans. Thus the books mention various occasions on which Māra appeared before the Buddha himself and his disciples, men and women, to lure them away from their chosen path.

Soon after the Buddha’s first *vassa*, Māra approached him and asked him not to teach the monks regarding the highest emancipation, he himself being yet bound by Māra’s fetters. But the Buddha replied that he was free of all fetters, human and divine (Vin.i.22). On another occasion Māra entered into the body of <span class="dppn-term dppn-term-t14" data-dppn-term-pos="37" data-dppn-term-class="t14">Vetambarī</span> and made him utter heretical doctrines, where Māra asks the Buddha about the further shore (SN.i.67; cp. Dhp­a.iv.141). In the <span class="dppn-term dppn-term-t14" data-dppn-term-pos="38" data-dppn-term-class="t14">Brahmanimantanikasutta</span> (MN.i.326) Māra is spoken of as entering the hearts even of the inhabitants, of the *Brahma* world. The <span class="dppn-term dppn-term-t14" data-dppn-term-pos="39" data-dppn-term-class="t14">Mārasaṁyutta</span> (SN.i.103ff) contains several instances of Māra’s temptations of the Buddha by assailing him with doubts as to his emancipation, feelings of fear and dread, appearing before him in the shape of an elephant, a cobra, in various guises beautiful and ugly, making the rocks of <span class="dppn-term dppn-term-t14" data-dppn-term-pos="40" data-dppn-term-class="t14">Gijjhakūṭa</span> fall with a crash; by making him wonder whether he should ever sleep; by suggesting that, as human life was long, there was no need for haste in living the good life; by dulling the intelligence of his hearers (e.g., at <span class="dppn-term dppn-term-t14" data-dppn-term-pos="41" data-dppn-term-class="t14">Ekasalā</span>; cf. <span class="dppn-term dppn-term-t14" data-dppn-term-pos="42" data-dppn-term-class="t14">Nigrodha</span> and his fellow <span class="dppn-term dppn-term-t14" data-dppn-term-pos="43" data-dppn-term-class="t14">Paribbājakas</span>, DN.iii.58). Once, when the Buddha was preaching to the monks, Māra came in the guise of a bullock and broke their bowls, which were standing in the air to dry; on another occasion he made a great din so that the minds of the listening monks were distracted. Again, when the Buddha went for alms to <span class="dppn-term dppn-term-t14" data-dppn-term-pos="44" data-dppn-term-class="t14">Pañcasālā</span>, he entered into the Brahmin householders and the Buddha had to return with empty bowl. Māra approached the Buddha on his return and tried to persuade him to try once more; this was, says the Commentary, a ruse, that he might inspire insult and injury in addition to neglect. But the Buddha refused, saying that he would live that day on *pīti*, like the <span class="dppn-term dppn-term-t14" data-dppn-term-pos="45" data-dppn-term-class="t14">Ābhassara</span> gods. The incident is related at length in SN­a.i.140f. and Dhp­a.iii.257f.; the Commentaries (e.g., Vin-a.i.178f.) state that the difficulty experienced by the Buddha and his monks in obtaining food at <span class="dppn-term dppn-term-t14" data-dppn-term-pos="46" data-dppn-term-class="t14">Verañja</span> (*q.v.*) was also due to the machinations of Māra.

Again, as the Buddha was preaching to the monks on *Nibbāna*, Māra came in the form of a peasant and interrupted the sermon to ask if anyone had seen his oxen. His desire was to make the cares of the present life break in on the calm and supramundane atmosphere of the discourse on *Nibbāna*. On another occasion he tempted the Buddha with the fascination of exercising power that he might rescue those suffering from the cruelty of rulers. Once, at the <span class="dppn-term dppn-term-t14" data-dppn-term-pos="47" data-dppn-term-class="t14">Sākyan</span> village of <span class="dppn-term dppn-term-t14" data-dppn-term-pos="48" data-dppn-term-class="t14">Sīlavatī</span>, he approached the monks who were bent on study, in the shape of a very old and holy Brahmin, and asked them not to abandon the things of this life, in order to run after matters involving time. In the same village, he tried to frighten <span class="dppn-term dppn-term-t14" data-dppn-term-pos="49" data-dppn-term-class="t14">Samiddhi</span> away from his meditations. <span class="dppn-term dppn-term-t14" data-dppn-term-pos="50" data-dppn-term-class="t14">Samiddhi</span> sought the Buddha’s help and went back and won *Arahant*-ship (cp. the story of <span class="dppn-term dppn-term-t14" data-dppn-term-pos="51" data-dppn-term-class="t14">Nandiya</span> Thera. <span class="dppn-term dppn-term-t14" data-dppn-term-pos="52" data-dppn-term-class="t14">Buddhaghosa</span> says (DN­a.iii.864) that when <span class="dppn-term dppn-term-t14" data-dppn-term-pos="53" data-dppn-term-class="t14">Sūrambattha</span>, after listening to a sermon of the Buddha, had returned home, Māra visited him there in the guise of the Buddha and told him that what he (the Buddha) had preached to him earlier was false. <span class="dppn-term dppn-term-t14" data-dppn-term-pos="54" data-dppn-term-class="t14">Sūrambattha</span>, though surprised, could not be shaken in his faith, being a *Sotāpanna*). Māra influenced <span class="dppn-term dppn-term-t14" data-dppn-term-pos="55" data-dppn-term-class="t14">Godhika</span> to commit suicide and tried to frighten <span class="dppn-term dppn-term-t14" data-dppn-term-pos="56" data-dppn-term-class="t14">Rāhula</span> in the guise of a huge elephant (Dhp­a.iv.69f). In the account of <span class="dppn-term dppn-term-t14" data-dppn-term-pos="57" data-dppn-term-class="t14">Godhika</span>’s suicide (SN.i.122) there is a curious statement that, after <span class="dppn-term dppn-term-t14" data-dppn-term-pos="58" data-dppn-term-class="t14">Godhika</span> died, Māra went about looking for his (<span class="dppn-term dppn-term-t14" data-dppn-term-pos="59" data-dppn-term-class="t14">Godhika</span>’s) consciousness (*paṭisandhicitta*), and the Buddha pointed him out to the monks, “going about like a cloud of smoke.” Later, Māra came to the Buddha, like a little child (*khuddadārakavaṇṇī*) (SN­a.i.145), holding a *vilva* lyre of golden color, and he questioned the Buddha about <span class="dppn-term dppn-term-t14" data-dppn-term-pos="60" data-dppn-term-class="t14">Godhika</span> (this probably refers to some dispute which arose among the monks regarding <span class="dppn-term dppn-term-t14" data-dppn-term-pos="61" data-dppn-term-class="t14">Godhika</span>’s destiny.)

The books mention many occasions on which Māra assumed various forms under which to tempt *bhikkhunīs*, often in lonely spots – e.g., <span class="dppn-term dppn-term-t14" data-dppn-term-pos="62" data-dppn-term-class="t14">Āḷavikā</span>, <span class="dppn-term dppn-term-t14" data-dppn-term-pos="63" data-dppn-term-class="t14">Kisā Gotamī</span>, <span class="dppn-term dppn-term-t14" data-dppn-term-pos="64" data-dppn-term-class="t14">Somā</span>, <span class="dppn-term dppn-term-t14" data-dppn-term-pos="65" data-dppn-term-class="t14">Vijayā</span>, <span class="dppn-term dppn-term-t14" data-dppn-term-pos="66" data-dppn-term-class="t14">Uppalavaṇṇā</span>, <span class="dppn-term dppn-term-t14" data-dppn-term-pos="67" data-dppn-term-class="t14">Cālā</span>, <span class="dppn-term dppn-term-t14" data-dppn-term-pos="68" data-dppn-term-class="t14">Upacālā</span>, <span class="dppn-term dppn-term-t14" data-dppn-term-pos="69" data-dppn-term-class="t14">Sisūpacālā</span>, <span class="dppn-term dppn-term-t14" data-dppn-term-pos="70" data-dppn-term-class="t14">Selā</span>, <span class="dppn-term dppn-term-t14" data-dppn-term-pos="71" data-dppn-term-class="t14">Vajirā</span> and <span class="dppn-term dppn-term-t14" data-dppn-term-pos="72" data-dppn-term-class="t14">Khemā</span>. To the same category of temptations belongs a story found in late commentaries (Ja.i.63): when <span class="dppn-term dppn-term-t14" data-dppn-term-pos="73" data-dppn-term-class="t14">Gotama</span> was leaving his palace on his journey of Renunciation, Māra, here called <span class="dppn-term dppn-term-t14" data-dppn-term-pos="74" data-dppn-term-class="t14">Vasavattī</span>, appeared before him and promised him the kingdom and the whole world within seven days if he would but turn back. Māra’s temptations were not confined to monks and nuns; he tempted also lay men and women and tried to lure them from the path of goodness – e.g., in the story of <span class="dppn-term dppn-term-t14" data-dppn-term-pos="75" data-dppn-term-class="t14">Dhaniya</span> and his wife (Snp­a.i.44; see also Ja.i.231f).

Mention is made, especially in the <span class="dppn-term dppn-term-t14" data-dppn-term-pos="76" data-dppn-term-class="t14">Mahā Parinibbānasutta</span>, of several occasions on which Māra approached the Buddha, requesting him to die; the first of these occasions was under the <span class="dppn-term dppn-term-t14" data-dppn-term-pos="77" data-dppn-term-class="t14">Ajapāla</span> Banyan tree at <span class="dppn-term dppn-term-t14" data-dppn-term-pos="78" data-dppn-term-class="t14">Uruvelā</span>, soon after the <span class="dppn-term dppn-term-t20" data-dppn-term-pos="79" data-dppn-term-class="t20">Awakening</span>, but the Buddha refused to die until the *Sāsana* was firmly established. Can it be that here we have the word Māra used in the sense of physical death (*Maccumāra*), and that the occasions referred to were those on which the Buddha felt the desire to die, to pass away utterly, to “lay down the burden”? Perhaps they were moments of physical fatigue, when he lay at death’s door, for we know (see <span class="dppn-term dppn-term-t14" data-dppn-term-pos="80" data-dppn-term-class="t14">Gotama</span>) that the six years he spent in austerities made inroads on his health and that he suffered constantly from muscular cramp, digestive disorders and headache (it is true that in the <span class="dppn-term dppn-term-t14" data-dppn-term-pos="81" data-dppn-term-class="t14">Mahā Saccakasutta</span> (MN.i.240ff.), which contains an account of the events leading up to the <span class="dppn-term dppn-term-t20" data-dppn-term-pos="82" data-dppn-term-class="t20">Awakening</span>, there is no mention whatsoever of any temptation by Māra, nor is there any mention of the Bodhi-tree. But to argue from this, that such events did not form part of the original story, might be to draw unwarranted inferences from an *argumentum e silentio*.) At <span class="dppn-term dppn-term-t14" data-dppn-term-pos="83" data-dppn-term-class="t14">Beluvagāma</span>, shortly before he finally decided to die, we are told that “there fell upon him a dire sickness, and sharp pains came upon him even unto death” (DN.ii.99; cp. Divy.203). But the Buddha conquered the disease by a strong effort of his will because he felt it would not be right for him to die without addressing his followers and taking leave of the Saṅgha. Compare with this Māra’s temptation of the Buddha at <span class="dppn-term dppn-term-t14" data-dppn-term-pos="84" data-dppn-term-class="t14">Maddakucchi</span> (*q.v.*), when he laid suffering from severe pain after the wounding of his foot by a splinter. It may have been the physical weariness, above referred to, which at first made the Buddha reluctant to take upon himself the great exertions which the propagation of his Dhamma would involve (e.g., Vin.i.4f). We know of other *Arahants* who actually committed suicide in order to escape being worried by physical ills – e.g., <span class="dppn-term dppn-term-t14" data-dppn-term-pos="85" data-dppn-term-class="t14">Godhika</span>, <span class="dppn-term dppn-term-t14" data-dppn-term-pos="86" data-dppn-term-class="t14">Vakkali</span>, <span class="dppn-term dppn-term-t14" data-dppn-term-pos="87" data-dppn-term-class="t14">Channa</span>. When their suicide was reported to the Buddha, he declared them free from all blame.

Can it be, further, that with the accounts of Māra, as the personification of Evil, came to be mixed legends of an actual *Devaputta*, named Māra, also called <span class="dppn-term dppn-term-t14" data-dppn-term-pos="88" data-dppn-term-class="t14">Vasavatti</span>, because he was an inhabitant of the *Paranimmitavasavatti Deva* world? Already in the <span class="dppn-term dppn-term-t14" data-dppn-term-pos="89" data-dppn-term-class="t14">Aṅguttaranikāya</span>, Māra is described as the head of those enjoying bliss in the <span class="dppn-term dppn-term-t14" data-dppn-term-pos="90" data-dppn-term-class="t14">Kāmāvacara</span> worlds (*aggo ādhipateyyānaṁ iddhiyā yasasā jalaṁ*) and as a *dāmarika Devaputta* (as mentioned earlier) AN.ii.17. Even after the Buddha’s death Māra was regarded as wishing to obstruct good works. Thus, at the enshrinement of the Buddha’s relics in the <span class="dppn-term dppn-term-t14" data-dppn-term-pos="91" data-dppn-term-class="t14">Mahā Thūpa</span>, <span class="dppn-term dppn-term-t14" data-dppn-term-pos="92" data-dppn-term-class="t14">Indagutta</span> Thera (by supernatural power) made a parasol of copper to cover the universe, in order that it might ward off the attentions of Māra (Mhv.xxxi.85).

Can it be that ancient legends represented him as looking on with disfavour at the activities of the <span class="dppn-term dppn-term-t14" data-dppn-term-pos="93" data-dppn-term-class="t14">Buddha</span>? <span class="dppn-term dppn-term-t14" data-dppn-term-pos="94" data-dppn-term-class="t14">Buddhaghosa</span> says (MN­a.i.533) that <span class="dppn-term dppn-term-t14" data-dppn-term-pos="95" data-dppn-term-class="t14">Māra</span> *Devaputta*, having dogged the Buddha’s footsteps for seven years, and having found no fault in him, came to him and worshipped him. Is it, then, possible, that some of the conversations, which the Buddha is reported to have had with Māra – e.g., in the second part of the <span class="dppn-term dppn-term-t14" data-dppn-term-pos="96" data-dppn-term-class="t14">Padhānasutta</span> (see above) were originally ascribed to a real personage, designated as <span class="dppn-term dppn-term-t14" data-dppn-term-pos="97" data-dppn-term-class="t14">Māra</span> *Devaputta*, and later confused with the allegorical Māra? This suggestion gains strength from a remark found in the <span class="dppn-term dppn-term-t14" data-dppn-term-pos="98" data-dppn-term-class="t14">Māratajjanīyasutta</span> uttered by <span class="dppn-term dppn-term-t14" data-dppn-term-pos="99" data-dppn-term-class="t14">Moggallāna</span>, that he too had once been a Māra, <span class="dppn-term dppn-term-t14" data-dppn-term-pos="100" data-dppn-term-class="t14">Dūsī</span> by name (MN.i.333; cp. DN.iii.79); <span class="dppn-term dppn-term-t14" data-dppn-term-pos="101" data-dppn-term-class="t14">Kāḷā</span> was his sister’s name, and the Māra of the present age was his nephew. In the *Sutta*, <span class="dppn-term dppn-term-t14" data-dppn-term-pos="102" data-dppn-term-class="t14">Dūsī</span> is spoken of as having been responsible for many acts of mischief, similar to those ascribed to the Māra of <span class="dppn-term dppn-term-t14" data-dppn-term-pos="103" data-dppn-term-class="t14">Gotama</span>’s day. According to the *Sutta*, Māra *Devaputta* was evidently regarded as a being of great power, with a strong bent for mischief, especially directed against holy men. This suggestion is, at all events, worthy of further investigation. See also *Mārakāyikā Deva*.

Māra bears many names in *Pāli Literature*, chief of them being <span class="dppn-term dppn-term-t14" data-dppn-term-pos="104" data-dppn-term-class="t14">Kaṇha</span>, <span class="dppn-term dppn-term-t14" data-dppn-term-pos="105" data-dppn-term-class="t14">Adhipati</span>, <span class="dppn-term dppn-term-t14" data-dppn-term-pos="106" data-dppn-term-class="t14">Antaka</span>, <span class="dppn-term dppn-term-t14" data-dppn-term-pos="107" data-dppn-term-class="t14">Namuci</span> and <span class="dppn-term dppn-term-t14" data-dppn-term-pos="108" data-dppn-term-class="t14">Pamattabandhu</span> (MNid.ii.489; for their explanation see MNid-a.328; another name of Māra was <span class="dppn-term dppn-term-t14" data-dppn-term-pos="109" data-dppn-term-class="t14">Pajāpatī</span>, MN­a.i.28). His usual standing epithet is *Pāpimā*, but other words are also used, such as *anatthakāma*, *ahitakāma*, and *ayogakkhemakāma* (e.g., MN.i.118).

Māra is called <span class="dppn-term dppn-term-t14" data-dppn-term-pos="110" data-dppn-term-class="t14">Namuci</span> because none can escape him *Namucī ti Māro; so hi attano visayā nikkhamitukāme devamanusse na muñcati antarāyaṁ tesaṁ karoti tasma Namucī ti vuccati* (Snp­a.ii.386). In the <span class="dppn-term dppn-term-t14" data-dppn-term-pos="111" data-dppn-term-class="t14">Mahā Samayasutta</span>, <span class="dppn-term dppn-term-t14" data-dppn-term-pos="112" data-dppn-term-class="t14">Namuci</span> is mentioned among the <span class="dppn-term dppn-term-t14" data-dppn-term-pos="113" data-dppn-term-class="t14">Asuras</span> as being present in the assembly, DN.ii.259; elsewhere in the same *Sutta* (p. 261f.) it is said that when all the <span class="dppn-term dppn-term-t14" data-dppn-term-pos="114" data-dppn-term-class="t14">Devas</span> and others had assembled to hear the Buddha preach, Māra came with his “swarthy host” and attempted to blind the assembly with thoughts of lust, etc. But the Buddha, seeing him, warned his followers against him and Māra had to depart unsuccessful. At the end of the *Sutta*, four lines are traditionally ascribed to Māra. They express admiration of the Buddha and his followers. In this *Sutta* Māra is described as *mahāsena* (having a large army).

The Commentary explains (DN­a.ii.689) that <span class="dppn-term dppn-term-t14" data-dppn-term-pos="115" data-dppn-term-class="t14">Namuci</span> refers to <span class="dppn-term dppn-term-t14" data-dppn-term-pos="116" data-dppn-term-class="t14">Māra</span> *Devaputta* and accounts for his presence among the <span class="dppn-term dppn-term-t14" data-dppn-term-pos="117" data-dppn-term-class="t14">Asuras</span> by the fact that he was temperamentally their companion (*te pi acchandikā abhabbā, ayam-pi tādiso yeva, tasmā dhātuso saṁsandamāno āgato*). <span class="dppn-term dppn-term-t14" data-dppn-term-pos="118" data-dppn-term-class="t14">Buddhaghosa</span> says that Māra is so-called because he destroys all those who seek to evade him (SN­a.i.133; cp. MNid-a. 328): *attano visayaṁ atikkamituṁ paṭipanne satte māreti ti Māro*; he is called <span class="dppn-term dppn-term-t14" data-dppn-term-pos="119" data-dppn-term-class="t14">Vasavatti</span> (SN­a.i.158) because he rules all, *Māro nāma vasavattī sabbesaṁ upari vasaṁ vattati*. <span class="dppn-term dppn-term-t14" data-dppn-term-pos="120" data-dppn-term-class="t14">Kāḷī</span> (<span class="dppn-term dppn-term-t14" data-dppn-term-pos="121" data-dppn-term-class="t14">Kāḷā</span>) is the mother of Māra of the present age. See <span class="dppn-term dppn-term-t14" data-dppn-term-pos="122" data-dppn-term-class="t14">Kāḷī</span> (4).

## Vietnamese translation

Chưa dịch.

## Notes
